add blog about cloud provider migration (#46342)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2024-05-13-cloud-provider-migration.md

Reviewer: Please send in a post-merge PR to fix the filename, so it matches the actual publication date,

title: 'Completing the largest migration in Kubernetes history'
date: 2024-05-20
slug: completing-cloud-provider-migration
author: >
  Andrew Sy Kim (Google),
  Michelle Au (Google),
  Michael McCune (Red Hat)
---

Since as early as Kubernetes v1.7, the Kubernetes project has pursued the ambitious goal of removing built-in cloud provider integrations.
While these integrations were instrumental in Kubernetes' early development and growth, their removal was driven by two key factors:
the growing complexity of maintaining native support for every cloud provider across millions of lines of Go code, and the desire to establish
Kubernetes as a truly vendor-neutral platform.

After many releases, we're thrilled to announce that all cloud provider integrations have been successfully migrated from the core Kubernetes repository to external plugins.
This migration was a complex and long-running effort due to the numerous impacted components and the critical code paths that relied on the built-in integrations for the
five initial cloud providers: Google Cloud, AWS, Azure, OpenStack, and vSphere. To successfully complete this migration, we had to build four new subsystems from the ground up:

> 1. [Cloud Controller Manager](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cloud-controller/)
> 2. [API Server Network Proxy](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/1281-network-proxy)
> 3. [Kubelet Credential Provider Plugins](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2133-kubelet-credential-providers)
> 4. [CSI In-tree Storage migration plugins](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-storage/625-csi-migration/README.md)

Reviewer: I'd link to KEPs consistently:
```suggestion
1. **Cloud controller manager** ([KEP-2392](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-cloud-provider/2392-cloud-controller-manager/README.md))
1. **API server network proxy** ([KEP-1281](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/1281-network-proxy))
1. **kubelet credential provider plugins ([KEP-2133](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2133-kubelet-credential-providers))
1. Storage migration to use [CSI](https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec?tab=readme-ov-file#container-storage-interface-csi-specification-) ([KEP-625](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-storage/625-csi-migration/README.md))
```

Feel free to put those in KEP order if you want to.

Each subsystem was critical to achieve full feature parity with built-in capabilities and required several releases to bring each subsystem to GA-level maturity with a safe and
reliable migration path. More on each subsystem below.

### Cloud Controller Manager

The cloud controller manager was the first external component introduced in this effort, replacing functionality within the kube-controller-manager and kubelet that directly interacted with cloud APIs.
This essential component is responsible for initializing nodes by applying metadata labels that indicate the cloud region and zone a Node is running on, as well as IP addresses that are only known to the cloud provider.
Additionally, it runs the service controller, which is responsible for provisioning cloud load balancers for Services of type LoadBalancer.

![Kubernetes components](/images/docs/components-of-kubernetes.svg)

> Learn more about Cloud Controller Manager [here](/docs/concepts/architecture/cloud-controller).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more, read [Cloud Controller Manager](/docs/concepts/architecture/cloud-controller/) in the Kubernetes documentation.
```

### API Server Network Proxy

> The API Server Network Proxy project, initiated in 2018 in collaboration with SIG API Machinery, aimed to replace the SSH tunneler functionality within the kube-apiserver.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
The _API server network proxy_ project, initiated in 2018 in collaboration with SIG API Machinery, aimed to replace the existing SSH tunneling functionality within the kube-apiserver.
```

I think “existing” helps clarity, but it's up to you if you don't like the tautology.

This tunneler had been used to securely proxy traffic between the Kubernetes control plane and nodes, but it heavily relied on provider-specific implementation details embedded in the kube-apiserver to establish these SSH tunnels.

Now, the API Server Network Proxy is a GA-level extension point within the kube-apiserver. It offers a generic proxying mechanism that can route traffic from the API server to nodes through a secure proxy,

> eliminating the need for the API server to have any knowledge of the specific cloud provider it is running on. This project also introduced the Konnectivity project, which has seen growing adoption in production environments.

Reviewer: (nit; OK to fix up post merge, and only if you'd like to)
Could link to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/control-plane-node-communication/#konnectivity-service here.

> Learn more about the API Server Network Proxy [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/apiserver-network-proxy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can learn more about the API Server Network Proxy from its [README](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/apiserver-network-proxy#readme).
```

### Kubelet Credential Provider

> The Kubelet credential provider plugin was developed to replace the kubelet's built-in functionality for dynamically fetching credentials for image registries hosted on Google Cloud, AWS, or Azure.

Reviewer: (nit; OK to fix up post merge, and only if you'd like to)
```suggestion
Support for kubelet credential provider plugins was developed to replace the kubelet's built-in functionality for dynamically fetching credentials for image registries hosted on Google Cloud, AWS, or Azure.
```

> This capability was convenient as it allowed the kubelet to seamlessly retrieve short-lived tokens for pulling images from GCR, ECR, or ACR. However, like other areas of the project,

Reviewer: (nit; OK to fix up post merge, and only if you'd like to)
```suggestion
The legacy capability was convenient as it allowed the kubelet to seamlessly retrieve short-lived tokens for pulling images from GCR, ECR, or ACR. However, like other areas of Kubernetes, supporting
```
?

this required the kubelet to have specific knowledge of different cloud environments and APIs.

> Introduced in 2019, the credential provider plugin offers a generic extension point for the kubelet to execute plugin binaries that dynamically provide credentials for images hosted on various clouds.

Reviewer: (nit; OK to fix up post merge, and only if you'd like to)
```suggestion
Introduced in 2019, the credential provider plugin mechanism offers a generic extension point for the kubelet to execute plugin binaries that dynamically provide credentials for images hosted on various clouds.
```
A _plugin_ is something you plug in, not the extension point that enables the plugging in.

This extensibility expands the kubelet's capabilities to fetch short-lived tokens beyond the initial three cloud providers.

> Learn more about Kubelet Credential Provider [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubelet-credential-provider/).

Reviewer: Here's what I'd write:
```suggestion
To learn more, read [kubelet credential provider for authenticated image pulls](/docs/concepts/containers/images/#kubelet-credential-provider).
```

- link to the concept explanation, not to a task related to it
- avoid “here” in hyperlinks
- use sentence case conventions
